um okay um we are uh Missing Bob
hamburger um our chairperson and Carol
Lee our vice chairperson uh has
requested that
um I run this this individual meeting so
I'm going to go about doing it the best
I can so the first thing on our agenda
I'm going to call to order the endover
charter revision commission special
meeting for Thursday July 11th 2024 at
6:05 pm. um the members that are in
attendance are Caren midor Carol Lee
Patricia Billings and Jeff Maguire so we
have a quorum of the seven
members
um we are going to move to public speak
and Shannon Lowden is Our member of the
public hi Shannon good evening thanks
Jeff um real quickly I'm here to
listened but the only thing I wanted to
say is well I understand that you may
not have wanted to publicize it until
after Dennis had reviewed it this is the
third meeting at which I've asked that
whatever has already been voted on by
the commission and what you're
considering be posted publicly and I
think it's getting to the point of being
really critical given that you're having
your public hearing next week so I will
just put in that request one more time
thanks a lot
okay um
Dennis O'Brien you are the only other
member of the public and I'm assuming
you're going to participate in enough in
this meeting do you need to State
anything no not at this time okay um
we're gonna move on to item three
approval of minutes we're going to skip
that item and um we're going to move on
to item four discussion and possible
action upon any Charter revision issue
uh at our previous meeting we reviewed
[Music]
um the documents prepared by the
chairman and the vice chairman related
to the items that were approved the
whole C whole uh Charter and then
attorney O'Brien had prepared an initial
draft and I am going to share my
screen so
that we
[Music]
can see both of these items so um I just
want to make sure which screen am I
sharing are you seeing the draft and the
charter
revision somebody says yes or no yes
okay so we're seeing this draft which is
the document that we were preparing
based upon what we had voted on and gone
through and on the right side is the the
charter revision commission draft report
for July 11th so Dennis has been working
in conjunction with car
to get this prepared so um as we go
through it the wording in the beginning
of the top of this is Denis so we're
down to this section um 105 so as Dennis
is going to say wording underlined in
blue is proposed to be added to the
Charter is revisions wording or any
reference section that is stricken in
red or proposed to be deleted from the
charter so we're going to move down to
on the left document which is our
document so Bob had done this at the
last and I thought it was very helpful
for at least me to go through this so
the first change that we had voted on
was related to the Mario ordinance
section so this is deter this is the
wording that we gave to Dennis and then
Dennis came through and prepared this so
This section here that I'm
highlighting will reference to this
section that is here so I'll read
Dennis's section so everybody can be
okay with it any ordinance enacted as a
minor ordinance prior to the deletion of
this General provision on the effective
date of the November 5th 2024 Charter
revision amendments shall continue to
remain in place effective unless until
thereafter repealed or amended by the
board of selecting so that is um just
letting everybody know that all the
ordinances in effect would stay in
effect anybody have any problem with
that if you do just check me and say
Jeff we need to make an adjustment or we
need to change and then Dennis can jump
in and tell us what we're doing so is
that okay with
everybody all
right so I'm going to move down the
document on the left so we had gotten to
section 203 Town officers general
election so this is related to the
timing of the
election and Dennis's draft report he
goes 2023 Town officers and so section A
and he's saying beginning on November
2nd 2027 and continuing every four four
years thereafter in the banial Municipal
elections to be held on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday of
November there shall be elected a board
of selectman so in this section it's
basically moving our elections to a
November timeline
um Dennis I will ask you a question
because you and I have had i' I started
to ask these questions
like is in the banial municipal election
accurate under this section of the
general election because it is a
four-year
term Yeah it's you're still having a
banal election but the uh correct we
have it every two years but every four
years the board of selectman will go up
right it specifies that the select are
fouryear term okay no problem so anybody
have any problem with that section in
that terminology
the only thing though Dennis I I think
Jeff is right because it's should be
2029 because that's when there oh no
you're right it's 2027 never mind get it
I'm all right you're skipping two years
I hope I'm still around then 2029 wow
it's all right so 2027
2027 is in this section and this is just
a house geping issue this has nothing to
do other than moving it from May to but
the charter had originally said to
moving it to November so we're just
stating November so okay um in the the
the board the commission's
document we talked about um this is
another section related to
um timing in May to November and so
section 203b regarding election of the
ton clerk is repealed in its entirety
and replaced is file presant to the
option set forth in general statute
section
9-15 as fully set forth in in in Dennis
this term should be below I
believe uh we need a b there oh yeah the
below all right yeah made a typo in
there this afternoon that's great we're
gonna find these in the below Char
section 702
7020 so Dennis I'm expecting you to
change that and it will be reviewed or
do you want me to change it and I I I
just changed my copy
so type in so in the below Charter
section
702 beginning with the November 2nd 2026
27 election the town clerk shall no
longer be
elected right so that goes into our
decision to make the town clerk a um
an appointed
position um anybody any questions or
problems with that section
no
okay uh then it goes to
C at the bani milal election to be held
on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday in November 2025 and every two
years thereafter thou shall be elected
members of the following boards
commissions and agencies for the tomb
terms specified herein and the remainder
of that section remains in place so what
that's doing is moving from May to
November and then all of the uh people
and like the board of finance that will
come up for the next election uh in 2025
will we will have a November election in
accordance with the state on the first
Tuesday after the first Monday in
November assuming everybody's good there
okay so we're going to go down to D so
these are all on the left side these are
all of
the groups that
are elected all the positions that we
have elected so Board of Finance Board
of assessment appeals planning zoning
zorder of appeals Board of Education
Fire Commission we get down to
D and this is the terminology that we
had provided to Dennis and this is what
he's writing in the draft D all terms of
office except as otherwise provided in
this Charter shall commence on the 3D
Tuesday after the first Monday of
November elected Town officials shall
hold office until their successors have
been chosen and qualified so what's that
that is saying and Carol just make sure
we're right
is the first Monday
after the fir the first Tuesday after
the first Monday so that would be the
first Tuesday is the election let's
and then you have two more Tuesdays and
then the
individuals hold their office or start
to take their office on that third
Tuesday in November is that accurate
okay okay that was the suggestion that
you uh you all made at the last meeting
to change that to uh third Tuesday
because I had it in terms that were not
as clear so you clarified that for me
yep so third Tuesday after the first
Monday of November okay we're good all
right and then on the left side we
didn't make any changes until we got to
210 and this goes for early voting in
210 and this was the terminology we
provided to Dennis the dates and hours
of early voting shall be conducted as
prescribed by state general statutes
section 210 the dates and hours of early
voting shall be conducted as P
prescribed by the Connecticut General
statutes and Dennis included as amended
so if the state makes adjustments we
just follow the state protocol everybody
good with that
okay then we go down to chapter three
the town
meeting 301 so this is where we're
starting to talk about the ordinance
sections and
information and 301 the legislative
authority of the Town shall be shared by
the board of Selectmen in the town
meeting the then we're going through
what we left in and we said in section
four um and it's enumerated there's
additional information enumerated I
might as well just read all this so
everybody hears it out loud and if you
have a problem or question please speak
up the legisla authority of the Town
shall be shared by the by the board of
Selectmen in the town meeting the town
meeting shall have Authority for final
approval of those actions of the town as
here in enumerated in section
304 the board of Selectmen shall have
legislative Authority for all matters
not specifically enumerated herein
the Hereafter in section 304 including
but not limited to the authority to
approve and enact repeal and modify all
ordinances after a public hearing and
also those Powers enumerated in section
402 and those Powers formally assigned
to the town meeting per section 304d of
this Charter section
301a elector authority to repeal any
ordinance legislatively and acted by the
board of Selectmen so this is where we
were trying to go through and provide
ample opportunity for anyone to question
a decision by the board of Selectmen and
repeal an ordinance so any action of the
board of Selectmen to an act repeal or
modify any ordinance except any
emergency ordinance enacted by enacted
per section 406 of this Charter shall be
subject to being repealed by way of a
special re referendum in the following
Manner and just so everybody's
understanding we did in one during Co we
did an emergency ordinance we were
required to so just so everybody
understands that that did come into play
and that was done
Co ordinances they can only be in place
for 60 days yeah 60 days and we had to
renew that I think three times three or
four times yep during that timeline okay
um so the board of Selectmen shall send
a written townwide mailer promptly
notifying the town elector in detail of
any such legislative action by the board
the mailer shall be sent to the office
of the town clerk where the date of its
receipt shall be noted on the public
record so what that's that's saying is
if the board of selectman wants to to
repeal or do anything related an
ordinance we need to send out a townwide
mailer and the clock does not start
ticking until everyone receives that and
the town clerk's office receives it
stamps it and that's the the date for
petitioning starting so nothing ever
happens unless you get a mailer so on so
then two to seek repeal of any such
legislative action by the board of
Selectmen a petition must be filed with
the T the office of the town clerk
within 20 days after official receipt by
the office of the town clerk of the
townwide mailer from the board of
Selectmen to be valid any such petition
must be timely filed by 5% or 50
of the electors of the Town whichever
number is less as determined by the
latest official registry of the registar
voters the petition must also conform
with the requirements of Connecticut
General statute section
7-9 accept is provided here in and be
signed an Inc requesting that such
ordinance be submitted to the voters in
a special referendum
so everybody would have 20 days to sit
there and file once the mailer is
received by the Tom clerk so this gives
us time between the date that any
ordinance would go into effect and when
uh someone would be able to push any
given ordinance to special referendum so
item three the Tom Clark shall within
seven days of receipt of any such
petition certify to the board of
Selectmen whether the petition included
a sufficient number of valid signatures
and was legally consistent with the
other requirements of this provision if
it is not legally sufficient in every
way the town clerk shall so inform the
selectman who sh shall declare the
petition invalid and the ordinance shall
take effect on the 45th day following
approval of the board of Selectmen so we
had requested 45 day delay between um
the the issue of doing a uh an ordinance
and the application or the um um
that ordinance being put into effect
that would give the the petitioners
enough time and it would cross two Board
of selectman meetings so if the bord of
Selman needed to reconsider their
ordinance they would have the ability to
do
that
okay
um if the petition contains sufficient
valid signatures for if the petition
contains sufficient valid signatures and
is otherwise legally sufficient the
effective date of the ordinance shall be
set aside and the selectman shall in
cooperation with the office of the
Secretary of State and State law
schedule a special referendum to be
conducted simultaneously with the
election regularly scheduled be held on
the first Tuesday after the first Monday
in in the month of November or with the
next regularly scheduled referendum
immediately following validation of such
petition so that section means that it
can either be put on the ballot in
November or put on the ballot in May and
that would allow us to not waste any
time if we needed to do this so the
ordinance shall stand approved but in
item five the ordinance shall stand
approved by the referendum uness
majority of the electors voting shall
have voted in favor of repealing such
ordinance provided however that at least
10% of the registered voters of the Town
shall have voted on the matter any
ordinance not so repealed shall take
effect on the day following the
referendum okay does anybody have any
problems with the petitioning process
and everything that we had addressed
that that I'm pretty sure that it lines
up with everything that had been written
in the emails that I provided back to
everybody um on the meeting before and
this meeting the changes that were made
so anybody have any problem with this
section or any changes Carol we good
good
okay okay
so on our other side we come into
section 303 annual Town budget
meeting so in yellow we were going to
delete the annual Town budget meeting
for the consideration of the budget
shall be held in the second week of
April in each year the adoption of the
budget shall be pursuant to the
provisions of section 803 of the charter
so we were doing this to line our dates
with um the ram budget referendum so
that we could have one referendum so
this is our attempt to try to get
everything to line up so that we were
only having one an initial round of
budget voting so um Carol does that line
up with your
dates yes
okay okay section 304 special town
meeting um this is the section where we
were trying to um level out reasons to
get to the or the the amounts of money
to get to a town meeting
um so under 304 special town meeting
providing that all other procedures and
and or prerequisites financial and
otherwise as delineated in the charter
have been met special town meeting shall
be called by the board of Selectmen and
shall follow section 302 of this Charter
for consider ation of the following
items
a
sorry oh I screwed that
up there we go a the issuance of bonds
and all other forms of financing
exceeding
$50,000 uh in value the terms which are
in ex ESS of one year
so $50,000 we raised that um we raised
that value I believe it was 2500 before
wasn't
it where was
that Carol in your Charter like where in
304 was that what was that that we
replaced
or was it zero we might have just said
all forms of
financing there was no there
no okay so there was it was in G the
2500 it's in G okay so so there was the
issuance of bonds or any form of
financing the town wanted to go to
public meeting for
any debt at all so we were putting in
not to exceed
$50,000 okay uh B any supplemental
appropriation with which exceeds 1%
limit set forth in section 805b
excluding any bonds or notes issued
subject to section uh
810d so we moved this from 1 half of 1%
to
1% and then this is where Adrian wanted
to sit there and put some limitations on
this any supplemental appropriation
which exceeds or is equal to 2 and a
half% of the current year budget
excluding the amount appropriated for
the Region 8 Board of Education and
approved by the board of Finance shall
go directly to referendum pursuant to
section 803 of this Charter so that was
the 2 and a half% was the the limit that
um it comes somewhere between to two to
close to $200,000
if if a board of Selectmen and the board
of Finance want to approve something
like the mower uh that we did through a
special town meeting uh this is moving
it to a referendum to get approved by
all the voters in
town so that was the exact wording that
we had
here okay so D um this is the creation
consolidation
modification or abolition of any
permanent board commission Department of
Charter and this going to town meeting
this has been
deleted
e assigned to the board of Select
[Music]
yeah uh e leases and or lease options in
excess of $50,000 so leases and or lease
options in excess of $50,000 to which
the town including the local board of
education is a party which involve a
term or obligation in excess of one year
incl excluding leases of Personality
Dennis can you just explain personality
for
everybody personalty that'd be personal
property as opposed to real
estate okay so so so if the school just
so we're clear I just want I want
everybody to be clear so if the school
wants to rent a
copier right it's not included
right okay just so we're all clear so if
if equipment is to be rented or least
and it's an excess of $50,000 we don't
need to go to town meeting for
that if it's in the budget it's been
approved just just want everybody to be
clear on what this is this is really
um I believe the way they were trying to
structure this is this is leasing of
like what would what would not
be what would not be
personality personalty
personalty just explain that what would
not be
personalty real estate real estate okay
so this whole section is only about real
estate okay well that that that that was
that language is all in the current
Charter no it's in the current I'm just
I'm just trying to make sure that we're
aware it wasn't add it wasn't change the
only change was to put in excess of 50
Grand correct that's all we are changing
but I'm now looking at this as a
resident under trying to understand the
charter and I'm like going that word
always bothered me so now I understand
the word so what this this section here
means to me is
real estate
leases because this term here right here
excluding leases of
Personality
sorry
okay it's a it's a legal term I know
lawyers I love
them yeah okay got to love them gota
love them
F any appropriation from the capital and
non-recurring expense fund not including
the annual budget which exceeds one qu
of
1% .25% of the budget as specified in
town in section of 805b there's no
change to this so Dennis
why this in
here
Dennis what that section F there is no
change in this section here between the
current Charter and what we're doing in
the draft why is this in
here it's just in there for context for
context I I I what I do when I do these
things these these draft reports is I
try to leave enough it's a judgment call
certain items in there that are not
changed just for context okay and and
that's okay I just wanted everybody to
understand we're not we're not
yeah no no not not as far as I know not
as far as I
was we were not changing that I just
want to make sure everybody understood
we were not changing that all right next
one is a big G yeah the so um this is
mine uh today and I I just I after
reading this and reviewing this this
morning um under G um we talk about
these are things that we changed uh this
first three three words all right um and
this is to go to uh town
meeting it says here in our Charter the
application for or participation in any
Federal Grant or private grant program
in excess of $2500 would need to go to a
town
meeting
um I'm I I'm going to ask that we we
remove the L the the the the app
application for
or the reason why I did this today when
I read it was because what it's doing is
it's saying we need to go that the board
or the Board of Education maybe not be
the board of education but the town
would need to go to a town meeting to
apply for a grant so let's take the case
of the Long Hill brand Grant bridge
program if we had done this correctly
which we're not I'm just letting
everybody know the way I read this is we
should have went and applied or or or
asked the town meeting if we could apply
for participation in that
Grant now and and when I say Long Hill
um we ended up getting Long Hill totally
paid for by Grant but in the beginning
phases it was an 8020 Grant so in
reality we should have gone to the town
meeting before we even applied for that
Grant and I I would ask if we could
remove that and that would be
um that's that's new to
tonight I'm just ask I'm G to ask if
everybody you we can leave it there and
I will tell you that the town will not
be doing that because Eric will be
applying for Grants or anybody will be
applying a grant be applying for Grants
and not going to a town meeting to get
it approved until we receive the Grant
and then we have to go and say okay when
we receive the grant so it's the next
section that I agree with the
participation in any Federal grant
federal state or private grant program
in excess of
$2500 excluding local and Regional Board
of Education which participation shall
require the town and or the local Board
of Education to contribute in excess of
$25,000 to enter into any such gr grant
program and then we would go to a Tom
meeting and say are we okay with
accepting this grant so that's the same
thing that we just did in town meeting
for the um $2.9 million Grant we
received to do the uh connectivity
between the trail and the town complex
so I would make a motion that we remove
from
section
304g the the wording application for or
I'll second okay I'll second all right
Carol seconded so um any further
discussion on those three those three
words all right all those in favor of
removing those words I okay for nothing
so in this in this section g uh it will
now read the participation in any
federal state or private grant program
in excess of
$2,500 excluding the local and Regional
Board of Education which participation
shall require the town and or the local
Board of Education to contribute in
excess of
$25,000 to enter into any such Grant
programs right so that was the wording
that was in here with just removing that
so that's that H um we'd have to go to
town meeting for the discontinuance or
abandonment of town roads we would have
to go uh
to
I
I sorry little
housekeeping
I um such other matters or proposals as
a selectman in their discretion shall
deem of sufficient importance to sub be
be submitted to a special town meeting
and we would delete in including
recommendation by the selectman for the
adoption modification or repeal of any
ordinance that was in here um one
second that was a removal from Dennis
because this if passed we would not need
if if the section on the ordinances
passes this section would be removed and
that was done by um attorney O'Brien and
that makes sense because if we get the
Ord issue moved then this would not be
required to be in the charter if it
doesn't pass then this goes back in the
charter right that accurate
Dennis that is accurate okay all right J
this section was removed this is about
the town ordinances so the reason why
that was
removed 30 same reason same reason yeah
but we knew that one we had identified
that in our document to be
deleted okay 305 petition P Town
meetings
um this section shall remain intact
except that any references to the
repealed Charter section 304d and 304j
shall be deleted so we put that
there all
right section
four Board of Selectmen
402 General powers and duties uh
a sorry I keep doing this I'm gonna send
this back to Dennis so he can
have so you can have a spaces between
these hey to enact amend or repeal
ordinances providing they are not
inconsistent with this Charter we're
deleting this section and not legally
inconsistent with the general statutes
of the state of Connecticut so uh so
that is what we're we put here and we
put not legally inconsistent with the
general statute States conect
B to enact
ordinances creating consolidating
modifying or abolishing agencies
commissions boards and authorities not
otherwise provided in this
Charter so to enact recommend
this was all deleted creating
Consolidated so that matches up with
what we're doing
there and please stop me if I'm going
too fast I don't want to over Rush this
but I'm just going through Section by
section uh section 404 public hearing on
and publication of ordinances this
section shall remain intact except that
the phrase not covered by Charter
section 105h shall be deleted and the
final sentence in section 404 shall be
amended as
follows every ordinance unless it shall
specify a later date shall become
effective on the 45th day after such
publication following its final
passage
um Dennis
yeah that's to make it with what you did
with uh I think we did this two days
ago yeah but what I'm reading as I'm
reading every ordinance unless it
specifies the later date I have no
problem shall become effective on the
45th day and we're saying after such
publication but it's not after the
publication it's it's after uh
enactments Ena should be the enact yeah
yeah you're right what we what we did
just so everybody understands what we
did is we we said the the repeal or the
petitioning would have a 20-day window
with inside that 45 day window so right
the thought is the board of Selectmen
gets the the document together to to get
out to the public to say this is an
ordinance that would like we would like
to enact the public then has 20 days to
petition that's all within this 45 day
window so that terminology is not
accurate in my
mind that's uh that publication word is
in the current Charter and I that's a
good catch by you because uh what you've
done with the um you know the appeal
process from the enactment of ordinances
is
unique and um I thought at first was a
bit convoluted but I think it works but
I think in order to make it this
consistent with that you're correct that
the word publication in this item and
second line from the bottom has to be
changed to uh enactment and I'd like to
know if Carol
agrees okay so your 404 and we're going
back to which one
30 I'm trying to go to 30 our
terminology and 30 4 of when it
uh
um when right it's it's right here it's
this section right here so Carol if no
one puts forth a petition right with
valid signatures it's not valid we say
the ordinance shall take effect on the
45th day following approval of the board
of
Selectmen right well there's a
publication to
Dennis right yeah I know but how does
that fit in now with this new system you
have I mean my M boggled by that Carol I
mean right now it's affective the 21st
day after it's the legal notice is
published in the
newspaper so I we
can't overrule that we would still have
to publish that
legal or can the charter overrule that
public
um I would say that that is something
that the charter can
overrule if you can do what you're doing
with the um appeals process for uh know
appealing from enactment by the board of
Selectmen I think I don't think the
state of Connecticut is going to care
whether you uh whether you uh have a
different uh public ation date given the
fact that you've uh you know you've
you've altered the 20 you know the norm
is 20 days you know that 21st day it
takes effect and that may be statutory
but that's why I inserted the word up
above legally
inconsistent uh there are some things
that could be inconsistent with state
law and other things that cannot and the
the one case that where this came up and
is is most notable that everybody points
to is the case from
nagat Jeff's Hometown where the nagat
put in the bation of the budgets school
and the uh Town budget even though there
was no provision for that in State
Statute but they said it was a matter of
local concern only and they allowed the
local uh government of ngat to make that
change and a lot of other towns of
course have followed suit so this this
my opinion off the top of my head right
now I believe that your publication
could change uh Carol and you could make
it uh could make the
publication probably not until the 45th
day I don't know well don't we listen
Carol just just so I understand this
because I I want to
be if
we pass an ordinance isn't the
publication of that ordinance what we
would be sending to the residents in the
mailer right so I I was just going to
say that we could publish the legal
notice that I would publish in the
newspaper and then correct we could put
except if overruled as provided in
section
301a I like that Carol now you're now
you're thinking that's a good
idea we could put we could publish after
20 days like the statute
requires and and just puts notice that
uh
specifies what our system is and so it
won't be effective until later on just
so we comply with the publication uh uh
deadline right I like that it has to be
publicized and then this way if someone
does petition we have that little clause
in there just to cover
it we don't cover we don't cover that in
the charter because it's state statute
and we don't need we don't really need
to so as long as we have that
understanding
uh I think we I still think we'd have to
change
404 it it couldn't be 45th day after
publication because that would stretch
it out to 65 days
right no because if there were no
petition that was brought forward
right yeah because we're putting that
clause in there so if there's no PO
that's brought forth the ordinance
becomes effective the 45th day after the
publication but
if it is petitioned then that 45 days
stops
ticking and then starts up after you
know as it's described and defined in
301k okay so so my question Carol is if
if a board of Select Elman approves an
ordinance
right when is that
published so I usually write when I get
the ordinance publish it so if you pass
it on a Monday at your meeting and I get
the minutes by Tuesday or Wednesday I
then publish that ordinance Friday
edition of The River East
just uh not the full ordinance but just
an abbreviated version of it letting
them know that F versions are available
on the website in the office okay and
and if that's the case I'm okay with
that but then Dennis you need to revise
the this this information up
here so it's ordinance shall take effect
on the 45th day following publication
not approval by the board of education
but by the board of
Selectmen you're saying should this
section 404 should say no no that
section if Carol if Carol is accurate
and she say and she's saying that that's
accurate it we we have to make
3013 and that
40 accurate like they need to Jive so
we're we're saying and the ORD shall
take a effect on the 45th day following
approval of the board of
Selectmen you see what I'm saying so
public that's only that's only if the
petition isn't declared
legal right or if there is a petition
don't
forget uh in most situations you're not
going to get a petition well let's say
let's there the petition overrules
everything and and the clock stops and
it goes a referendum that's the reality
of it but I'm just talking about I'm
just talking about the execution of an
ordinance that didn't get petitioned I'm
just trying to line up this language
here this or you're right right you're
right so this language should be as as
as I think I said
before uh without thinking it TR to the
extent we have now this language should
be 45th day after an after anent I
believe it's it should I think it should
be 45 45th day following
publication yes what do you what do you
mean by publication Jeff okay so down
now no no what Carol is saying Carol has
to put it into the the
paper that an ordinance is going to be
enacted in the town forget the mailer
the mailer has to deal with the petition
the petition right right right but in
this section here right
um in this section what what we're
saying is the the shall become effective
on the 45th day after such publication
following its passage so you have to
take this
wording here the 45th day after such
publication following its final passage
and put it up in this
section
here so you're talking that it could be
as many as 65 days no it can't be that
long it can only be yes it can yes it
can yes it can because she has even
though she may publish it the next day
but but but the publication is not
required until 20
days no the way the process work I
understand what you're saying but if
Carol and just correct me if I'm wrong
because I the board of Selectmen has a
meeting on a Tuesday and it passes a a
potential ordinance that that Denis and
everybody we'd be involved in we would
then give give it to the town clerk and
you would put it in the River East and
say the town of Andover is potentially
passing a new ordinance and the document
is available in the town clerk's office
right that would go in hopefully the
next
publication hopefully hopefully doesn't
know happen I mean so what's the worst
case scenario I Hound Carol and say
Carol you got to get this in the River
East it doesn't get there the first week
it gets there the second week
right I mean well the worst case
scenario is in other towns they
sometimes don't get it in until 20 days
after and I get it and we're gonna have
to live with that I mean that's the
board of Selectmen needs to
work5 so are you saying now to wait 20
days for me to no I want you to publish
it immediately no I'm not no I'm not
saying that Carol but okay that's that's
how much time uh you have it's got to be
published before the
uh before the 20 21st
day no but you're missing we we are the
convoluted Town we're putting in a
better check and bage program we're
putting in a better check and balance
program so the way this process should
work is Board of Select makes an an
ordinance issue an ordinance decision
the ordinance language is written Carol
receives the ordinance language that
notice is then put into the paper that's
step one right Carol put into the paper
right yes right so so that starts listen
listen Den that starts the 45 day
clock that starts the 45 day
clock then in conjunction with this we
put a mailer out to all the residents of
the town that starts the petitioning
plock
right so they right can they be two
separate clocks so in other words at the
45 day clock is ticking and the petition
is deemed not legal in any way and it's
not valid then on the 45th day that
ordinance takes a effect but if the
petition is
legal then the 20 days are going to take
effect because that 45th day is going to
now stop that clock is going to stop
ticking and the 20 days is going to tick
and then if it is defeated at
referendum then it takes effect the
following day takes effect the following
dayb so
Dennis Carol's I agree with Carol and I
understand what she's saying so good to
me it's the Dennis just as you used to
have 20 days from publication
date we're just saying 45 days from
public yes yes right but the norm is
that you ordinances take effect 21 days
after they're
enacted okay so right you have to in the
you have to publish in the newspaper
either the ordinance for btim which we
don't have to do because we have a we
have an ordinance that allows us to do a
summary okay you have to publish
something in the newspaper saying this
ordinance has been passed and that is uh
I think you can just do that anyway and
and and and CH and keep this change this
from publication to or else you're going
to have ordinances that don't go into
effect until 50 days 55 days for
whatever whatever the countdown is of 45
days from the date of publication right
Carol you're going to get no matter what
when when the River East publishes it
you're going to have to count off 45
days if it's not appealed and and and
you're going to delay the ordinance even
even more meanwhile if you put the
publication in the paper as you
suggested Carol and and and make it
clear that you know it won't go into
effect if if a uh a petition is filed uh
speaking uh appeal uh then you know uh I
I I think I think if you leave this at
publication then uh you could have an
ordinance going into effect uh actuality
if it's any any any number of days you
know after 45 and Carol I can I think
would incredible m i could I listen I
can understand what Dennis is saying
because Carol the timing of the
publication and the petition will will
be able to fit inside that 45 days right
right so Dennis all I'm saying now then
I'm going to reverse myself this
language
here and the ordinance shall take effect
on the 45th day following approval of
the board of selectman needs to be the
language in here on 40 yes okay yes or
just change publication to enactment
enactment is the you know or you could
say enactment by the board of selectman
approval by the board of selectman then
you don't have a problem you you you you
do your public apption in the interim
but it doesn't mess up this 45 day uh uh
uh time limit that you have placed on it
through your your uh appeal
scheme does anybody have a problem with
that because all of the deadlines will
fall in
place so if this section
here I'm going to change it right now
on
mine change publication to uh approval
by the board of
Selectmen sorry I don't want to do
that such an
as okay so you're gonna
change so you're gonna sit there and
say 45th day following approval of the
board of
Selectmen
right okay and then those two section of
the charter
will will line up and then just so we're
all aware we're all good with this the
way that this this operationally should
work is the bard of selectman passes an
ordinance the ordinance language is
provided to the to the town clerk's
office
we then send out a mailer and we publ we
put it into the paper at first available
opportunity we put it into the paper
that there's an ordinance going to go
into effect and if you'd like the full
text it's available to Tom clerk's
office
then the mailer goes out and the
petition clock starts so the petition CL
clock could be the petition clock could
start on day
10 and they would have till day 30 to
get 50 signatures because that's what it
would take and then that would be within
the 45 day window that we would get all
this okay so Dennis you're gonna change
this you're gonna change this I I have
better language for this okay I just
thought about it because because the
language that follows it is following
its final
passage so if I if we just take
out if you you just make them both line
up and say the same thing 45 days
following approval of the board of
Selectmen I think I would be happy
because they would be consistent and I
think everybody else would suppos be
happy they would be
consistent I I think we're there I think
we're there I'm I'm I'm going to take
out after such
publication and just leave following its
final passage
in that's that's the final passage from
the board of Selectmen
following
its we could change final passage to
make it clearer of uh if uh it's it's
approval by the board of selected yes
please that would be better I'm gonna do
that
okay
yeah that was a good discussion sorry
I'm I'm sorry
well great minds end up thinking alike
well now that I'm home I can have these
things so
605 so um this was uh this was put into
effect in 1999 so we were trying to get
this except as otherwise specifically
provided for in this Charter the terms
of all Town board members shall be for
two years and shall commence on the
first Monday in July of 2025 and banally
thereafter all Tom board members shall
be eligible for reappointment and shall
continue in office until a successor has
been appointed and has qualified so this
was Carol uh this was about appointed
boards such as the rec commission or
some of the boards that are non-elected
it's a two-year term and they just re
reup every two years so and we got rid
of July of 1999
so oops I'm sorry everybody didn't put
that on
mute I will put that on
mute okay we're going down to chapter
seven we don't have anything else on our
documents here here this is removal of
the elected position so administrative
Services 701 TR at the beginning of this
section 701 deleted with the exception
of 7020 town clerk which is an elected
position but the rest of section 701
will remain in place okay
[Music]
702 702 administrative
positions at the very beginning let's
see 72 director of Health sorry director
of Health this is where we're trying to
deal with uh we don't always have these
individuals as employees we have them as
subcontracted vendors so the director of
Health the board of Selectmen shall
appoint a director of Health as mandated
by the state of
Connecticut um the rest of this will be
deleted and then in the same way e an
animal control officer the board of
Selectmen shall appoint an animal
control officer or contract with animal
control
services um
Dennis on the director of Health I'm
just going to ask a question and I'm
sorry I'm doing this but we use Eastern
Health High uh Eastern Health uh Eastern
Highland Health District right
um is that a director of Health Carol or
a contracted
service just a question oh it's it's the
contracted service for these
is and so the Eastern Health High
District in Essence becomes our director
of Health the organization becomes our
director of Health um okay and Dennis is
that okay is that okay because we're
doing it as mandated by the state of
Connecticut yeah that's the way I see it
okay good I'm okay with that done
that's it's about every place now okay
uh smaller smaller places okay so now we
were doing oh this is the town
clerk uh section uh uh
um and Dennis is this uh okay this is oh
a town clerk the office of the town
clerk shall have permanent status
pursuant to option set forth in general
statute section
9-15 beginning with the November 2nd
2027 election the town clerk shall no
longer be elected rather on or after
November 16th 2027 and every four years
thereafter the board of
Selectmen uh most recently elected in
the November municipal election shall on
or after two weeks following the date of
their election by a minimum of three
votes appoint a qualified person to be
the Tom clerk to work in that capacity
beginning on January 2nd of the new year
for a term of four years subject to the
requirements of chapter 92 of the
general statutes as amended regarding
Town clerks um um Dennis the you know
the language is fine there might be a
period after as amended um you might
want to either make that a comma
or as amended I think you're right GNA
change it right now
okay got it uh anybody have any issues
with that
section the only change in that section
from last meeting is the I added the
first sentence the oppos of the town
clerk shall have permanent status that
was the request that was made last
meeting good with
that
um
703 Carol is that um is that a typo in
the current Charter
this yes I'm just I just pointed it out
so I fix it when okay
understood uh finance and Taxation 202
so this SE these sections are all to
align our voting into get to
one referendum budget where we vote on
both the town and the ram budget uh all
at once so uh section 802 duties on the
budget a all new no later than October
15th the board of Finance shall confer
with the board of Selectmen and the
Board of Education to discuss the goals
and objectives for the upcoming budget
the board of Finance may suggest a
Target increase for expenditures for
both the general government and Board of
Education budgets however the target
increases shall not be binding with
respect to budget submittals
um Carol and and the team uh can we
remove
increases can we just say budget
targets because I'm just saying I know
it's in the charter and it really won't
mean anything
but a future board of Finance could say
we need to go down right we we could do
that anybody else have a problem if we
just say targets so it would be the
board of Finance shall confer with the
board of selectman and the Board of
Education to to discuss the goals and
objectives for the upcoming budget the
board of Finance may suggest suggest a
target for expenditures for both the
general government and Board of
Education budgets however the targets
shall not be binding with respect to
budget submittal anybody have a problem
with
that um I think uh Bob's term was
unanimous consent is that okay did we
remove those yes that's okay um Dennis
can you remove uh increase on both those
sentences y did it so suggest a Target
and in the second one it's however the
targets uh or no the target the target
it is Target the Target shall shall not
uh the target shall not be binding with
respect to budget submittals okay
increases out in both places yes please
already done thank you um B agency
department head section 802 in the
current Charter uh we're removing 120
days and we're saying at least 150 days
before the end of the fiscal year the
head of each department office and or
agency of the town
supported wholly or in part by Town
funds except the regional board of
education and the local Board of
Education shall file with the Town
Administrator a detailed estimate of
expenditures to be made by that
department office or agency and the
revenues other than property taxes to be
collected thereby in the ensuing fiscal
year such estimates shall be accompanied
by a statement setting forth the
services activities and work
accomplished during the current year
and plann for accomplishments for the
ensuing fiscal year the local Board of
Education must
must oh the the local board of education
budget must be submitted to the board of
Finance by February
15 and that is the what we put in here I
don't think there's any problems with
that uh C all new duties of the Town
Administrator the Town Administrator
shall review the budget estimates upon
completion of the review and not later
than 120 days prior to the end of the
fiscal year the Town Administrator shall
present to the board of selectman and
board of finance a proposed budget in
preparing the proposed budget the Town
Administrator may come May comment and
make recommendations on the budget
requests made by various departments
offices and
agencies so that was this section
here
D there shall be budget review meetings
in March which shall be joint meetings
of the board of selectman and the board
of finance a quorum of at least one of
the two boards is required to conduct
business
okay duties of the board of Finance
formally SEL section
802b and we're saying the board of
financial review of the budget estimates
with the heads of all Town supported
Department offices and agencies as
needed
um there's still additional text that's
in there and then it comes the board of
Finance shall include the estimated
budget request of the Regional School
District number eight Board of Education
in their recommended
budget E1
upon completion of the review and not
later than 85 days prior to the end of
the fiscal year the board of Finance
shall hold a public hearing on their
recommendations on their recommended
budget excuse
me and that is all to align with what
we're trying to get to with
one um
one
referendum
803 the annual Town budget meeting and
referendum the annual Town budget
meeting shall be held in the second week
of
April and then we're going to the town
meeting May make amendments to the
proposed budget provided however that
the town meeting shall only have the
power to reduce or modify but not
increase the budget or any portion
thereof the town meeting may not alter
any specified items contained in the
budget proposed by the local Board of
Education the town meeting shall adjourn
to referendum uh shall adjourn to a
referendum to be held on the Tuesday
following the 1 Monday in May so what
that does is that aligns the budget
referendums with the ram referendum
voting by absentee ballot at the
referendum is allowed
just as a side question Carol do we
allow we don't oh well we don't allow we
don't allow um absentee ballots do we
allow absentee ballots in our current uh
referendum the referendums yes Town
meetings no that mean so
okay all
right so that's
a so
B I'm sorry that was B so that was what
we said here the time meeting other
during to referendum be held Tuesday
following right voting by absentee
ballot referendum is allowed C is
deleted D is deleted to this point if
the budget is defeated at a first
referendum the budget will be bifurcated
into separate votes this is what was
done last budget or last Charter
revision cycle on the town budget and
the local board of education budget
individually and the process shall Begin
Again with the board of Finance as set
forth in 802e above and continue until
each B forged budget is passed the board
of Finance shall review any rejected
budget and present the same or revised
budgets
to
um why was that removed I'm sorry to the
next referendum which will be held
exactly to okay so we have to get rid of
and
then
okay and yeah to the next ref which will
be held exactly two weeks later if only
one of the two bifurcated budget is
passed at referendum it is final and may
be implemented for the new fiscal year
but this process must continue for any
failed budget until it is
passed um
so
[Music]
02 after the final adoption of the
budget referendum with consideration of
the external budgeting factors including
State Appropriations and or the Region 8
Board of Education the board of Finance
shall meet as soon as possible to set
the mill rate for the upcoming fiscal
year
okay supplemental
Appropriations duties of the board of
finance and there's actually the board
of Finance shall be empowered to make
supplemental Appropriations up to an
including amount that that cumul is
equal to 1% 1% approved by the board of
Finance those which exceed the
cumulative one % of the current year
budget excluding the the amount
appropriated for the Regional School
direct should shall be submitted to a
special town meeting pursuant to the
provisions of section 304b of this
Charter and if approval be sent to
referendum pursuant to section 803 of
this
Charter okay what's 1% of current year
budget
approximately I'm
curious uh
[Music]
$80,000
okay I
[Music]
mean that's not much am I wrong
Karen because it doesn't include Ram I I
just I always split the town into three
different buckets they're all about $4
million it's $4 million time with all
the capital spending so it's two and a
half regular spending one and a half
capital spending then the the Board of
Education the AES Board of but 4 million
plus a little bit more and and RAM is 4
million plus a little bit more and to do
this we would take the ram portion out
and it's $8
million
right so so this is a supplemental
appropriation so what did we
do because now Carol I want to I I want
to sit there and think about this like
we just went on a supplemental
appropriation to a to
meeting right we we passed that we did
not go to referendum did we
[Laughter]
no so that was um we voted on that back
in June that was Adrian's proposal that
we put the cap on
that that forced us to go directly to
referent no no no I I totally get that
but what I'm after is this section
here um this section supplemental
Appropriations as currently
written said that we should have gone
to a town meeting and then to refer that
is
correct you are
correct so am I saying made a
mistake
oh oh my God I I mean my whole goal in
all of this honestly if like this whole
Charter revision it was an attempt to be
more efficient and have less specials in
anything whether it's a special Tom
medium or special referendum so we
actually have that language in here that
is even worse than what Adrian is
proposing which is this next section
but we didn't take any of that language
out either that says it will be
sent referendum we left that in in B
so that supplemental appropriation going
directly to referendum we're just
bypassing the special town meeting and
forcing anything that
is that large of an amount to go
straight to a referendum so rather
than understood and I think
everybody everybody including myself
ignored this
sense the last sentence of that yeah
yeah yeah yeah because I was not aware
of that I I always thought the town
meeting ruled everything honestly from
this standpoint and I never I didn't
know that was that sentence was in
there um that's a problem I mean listen
it's not as if it's a but that that's a
problem that's something that this
Charter commission should we should
remove that if we're going to do
this I'm I'm I'm just saying so what it
should be is if there is
um if there is a a a supplemental
appropriation greater than 1% It should
go to the town meeting and be approved
or denied by the town meeting and moved
on if if it is greater than 2 and a
half% or $200,000 so what we were
attempting to do here is say hey there's
a threshold that the entire town should
vote on
it
right this is what I thought what we
were attempting to do was was make it so
that if it's significant in enough that
the town would gone and if it was low
enough that the the town meeting would
sit there and approve it um so yeah this
a
problem and does anybody have a bra I a
motion to to strike that
language you're talking about the
language that the language that takes
the uh under B that takes it to
referendum and then just leave it to the
town meeting right
I'm I'm going to sit there and make a
motion that we strike from section 805
supplemental Appropriations language and
if approved will be sent to referendum
pursuant to section 803 of this
Charter anyone want to second
that
I okay all right but 805b so you're
moving to strike that
last
sentence and if approved will be sent
because from that point on corre just
that just that part
yeah sorry I'm trying to take
notes that's
okay okay so Jeff Mo Karen you seconded
right
yes okay so um any further discussion on
that or anybody have a problem like with
the thought process on
that no okay all those in favor
I okay Patty you are
good okay excellent all right so now
this is where we get to referendum now
so we're going to go on the uh we're
adding to section uh 805b and we're
saying any supplemental appropriation
which exceeds or is equal to 2.5% or
$200,000 whichever is greater of the
year's current budget excluding the
amount appropriated for the Region 8
Board of Education approved by the board
of Finance shall go directly to
referendum pursuant to section 803 of
this Charter so this is the language
where we we said there's there's a
threshold that should go to
[Music]
referendum okay
uh let's go down here 806 accounting
agency no changes in anything
here we're now down
to transfers of
power
so so section um
I didn't see anything that
this okay so this was a a housekeeping
issue related to
105k and
105j so this was this section should
remain intact except that any references
to section 105k and 105j will be
removed we did not put that in here but
that is a legal housekeeping issue that
that
identified yeah it's a cosmetic change
eventually yeah uh section 108 review an
amendment to the Charter if upon a
review amendments to the Chan Charter
are deemed necessary the board of sele
appointed charart revision commission
giving the commission a minimum of six
months to change to complete so this was
actually added section 108 review and
Amendment to the Charter add a second
paragraph to section 108 as follows if
any such review if if after any such
review the board of Selectmen does vote
to appoint a charter revision commission
the board shall give any such commission
a minimum of six months to submit the
draft report to the board so we voted on
that moved
forward uh I modified it slightly simply
because uh the Lang the previous
language was too vague in terms of
saying when the six Monon rule you know
how far went because your your um charge
it said you used your charge you had to
complete your charg by the end of six
months and the thing that you're really
charged to do is to submit a draft
report which is this document we're
working on now and if the draft report
is approved by the board of Selectmen
the committee is pretty much done so
that's that's the first point at which
your work could be possibly
done so so so I changed it to that it it
works because Carol just so I mean this
was this was on your end the request was
if if a board of selectman is going to
appoint a charter commission the minimum
that the charter commission should have
is six months yes so this is basically
this it is the same thing minimum of six
months to submit their
yes okay um resignations
um this is just a
a a resignation is effective when
someone writes the resignation so this
is just a housekeeping issue to remove
said resignation shall become effective
upon the acceptance of the by a vote of
the board of selectman so it was removal
of that
sentence right right effective date um
the Tarter shall become effective upon
the approval of a majority of the
electors
voting at an an election on November 5th
2024 and in accordance with the
provisions of chapter 99 of the general
statutes as amended provided however
that no new provisions of this Charter
shall be implemented until July 1st 2025
with the exception of any revisions
enacted by the electors on November 5th
2024 in chapter 8 finance and Taxation
and Charter section
203c which may be implemented
immediately there
after Charter section 203c applies to
the uh banial election since you're
going to have a banial election in
2025 uh people can start getting ready
for that earlier in the year uh with all
there's all kinds of things that go on
in election years and we didn't want to
restrict anybody from not from partaking
of any electoral activities
uh early in the uh next year because
they may want to to get ready for the
banial election in November of
2025 so we can have those things go to
effect the the other
part finance and Taxation part you want
that effective right away so that you
can apply it to your next budget which
is coming up uh you be putting together
your budget
does right after the first of the
year uh actually October I think the
first date was that we had well that's
right so have it would have to go into
effect those sections will have to go
into effect in 2024 which is fine right
right okay so and then these last
sections Dennis in the the section uh
102 transition these are all
transitional uh sections from
previous uh drafts of the charter so
what we're saying section 1012 1013 and
1014 transactional these three sections
were all transactional at previous times
but are no longer relevant and necessary
and therefore deleted in their entirety
they are preserved in the Vault of the
town clerk as all former versions of the
Town Charter are carefully kept and
preserved and may be reviewed
there okay yep if you want to find out
the history you go to the town clerk
Okay so so that is
um that are all of the changes that we
have a board voted on and done is there
anything anybody's wants to go back or
review or has any questions as to what
we did or what we should
do all right um Dennis the the minor
changes that we asked uh so Carol just
so I know she might be away for a second
but
um when she gets back so Carol we had
two motions today
right
yes okay can you just can you just read
those so we're all aware before we V so
you voted you move
304g as in golf to remove
uh application the application
application for or and just do the
participation okay yes so
um you moved I seconded that was
unanimous and then we moved in section
802 to remove the word
increase in two
areas and then if was just a unanimous
consent for the 805 just to fix that um
to
strike that one the other one was
unanimous consent that this one this one
we voted on Karen okay this was I'm
sorry I had my I have a I have a line so
it was unanimous consent to remove the
word increase from two areas and then
you moved and Karen
seconded 80 5 b for the supplemental
appropriation
to
[Music]
um will be sent to special Town meetings
pursuant to the provisions of section
Bill 4 B of this Charter and stop there
so remove and if approv will be sent to
referend so those are the ones that we
did today so
Dennis more
there the one that we spent a lot of
time discussing about uh the 45
days um it's it's I believe section wait
a
minute
[Music]
um
oh it's 404
404 no it's long it's it's 404
4043 was where it started because that
was if the
petition was not legal and then
um yes that's four you're right it's 404
and and it's and it's uh It's 301
3013 and and four what was that number
again Carol I'm sorry there it is
404 so Dennis you're going to get this
language here this this language to be
consistent between those two sections I
got it all already all right okay you
need a motion to pass whole thing yes we
need a motion to pass the whole thing
but I want everybody to understand and
and and be on board that these were
changes that we did today
um I mean they're not they're not crazy
changes but I just want everybody to be
aware that these are things that we did
today um before we pass this because
what you're going to do is you've made
those changes Dennis and you're going to
get those to Carol and to at least to
myself so we can review these one last
time before Carol you're gonna publish
this on the wall of the well you're not
going to publish this on a wall we're
going to take this to our meeting next
week for the public
right but I'm gonna on everybody goes
through it I'm also going to send it for
the to the website too okay go explain
to us once it's proved it it goes into
Carol's office also for review by
anybody who comes in and wants to see it
starting
Monday so that so that by the time the
public hearing comes around people will
haven't had an opportunity to read
it uh in in the town clerk's office or
maybe she can give copy out I don't know
but in the notice that we sent to the
uh uh the newspaper that's going to be
published
tomorrow yeah tomorrow is Friday yep and
uh going to say that this is going to be
available in the town office of the town
clerk starting Monday okay and and Carol
um we'll get this to um Eric and to uh
his assistant to get put up on the
website yeah
okay so Dennis you'll have this to us
tomorrow morning with those
adjustments or tonight I have it to 10
minutes five minutes after this meeting
is over
okay I'm on top of
it okay so I'll I'll sit there I'll I'll
make a motion that we uh move the uh
we move the Andover Charter revision
commission revised draft report of July
11th 2024 forward for um publication to
the town
residents I'll second
that
okay who's got that Patty Patty got that
one all right P got that one
right all right any discussion on this
okay all those in favor
I
okay okay is there anything else that
any of the members want to discuss
related to this before we move on to
item
five
okay I will stop sharing and uh let's
move on to item five public speak
Shannon you are a public member thank
you for all your work nothing for my
public comment I'll look forward to
getting a copy on Monday thanks okay it
will be available on the website
tomorrow if you need
it right okay
um Karen why don't you make this motion
I will make the motion to
adjourn Patty you gonna second that yes
Patty got I know she wants it I know she
wants it I do thank you all right all
those in favor I
thank you very much Dennis thank you all
right we'll see you guys thank you all
you did a wonderful job on this it was
not easy but a really nice result thank
you thank you pleasure to
work all right good night
guys well good night
enjoy I have to stop
this oh I have to do it here